---
layout: post
title: "In defence of swap: common misconceptions"
---

tl;dr:

1. Having swap is a reasonably important part of a well functioning system.
   Without it, sane memory management becomes harder to achieve.
2. Swap is not generally about getting emergency memory, it's about making
   memory reclamation egalitarian and efficient. In fact, using it as
   "emergency memory" is generally actively harmful.
3. Disabling swap does not prevent disk I/O from becoming a problem under
   memory contention, it simply shifts the disk I/O thrashing from anonymous
   pages to file pages. Not only may this be less efficient, as we have a
   smaller pool of pages to select from for reclaim, but it may also contribute
   to getting into this high contention state in the first place.
4. The swapper on kernels before 4.0 has a lot of pitfalls, and has contributed
   to a lot of people's negative perceptions about swap due to its
   overeagerness to swap out pages. On kernels >4.0, the situation is
   significantly better.
5. On SSDs, swapping out anonymous pages and reclaiming file pages are
   essentially equivalent in terms of performance/latency. On older spinning
   disks, swap reads are slower due to random reads, so a lower `vm.swappiness`
   setting makes sense there (read on for more about `vm.swappiness`).
6. Disabling swap doesn't prevent pathological behaviour at near-OOM, although
   it's true that having swap may prolong it. Whether the system global OOM
   killer is invoked with or without swap, or was invoked sooner or later, the
   result is the same: you are left with a system in an unpredictable state.
   Having no swap doesn't avoid this.
7. You can achieve better swap behaviour under memory pressure and prevent
   thrashing using `memory.low` and friends in cgroup v2.

---

As part of my work improving kernel memory management and [cgroup
v2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ikZ8_mRotT4), I've been talking to a lot of
engineers about attitudes towards memory management, especially around
application behaviour under pressure and operating system heuristics used under
the hood for memory management.

A repeated topic in these discussions has been swap. Swap is a hotly contested
and poorly understood topic, even by those who have been working with Linux for
many years. Many see it as useless or actively harmful: a relic of a time where
memory was scarce, and disks were a necessary evil to provide much-needed space
for paging. This is a statement that I still see being batted around with
relative frequency in recent years, and I've had many discussions with
colleagues, friends, and industry peers to help them understand why swap is
still a useful concept on modern computers with significantly more physical
memory available than in the past.

There's also a lot of misunderstanding about the purpose of swap -- many people
just see it as a kind of "slow extra memory" for use in emergencies, but don't
understand how it can contribute during normal load to the healthy operation of
an operating system as a whole.

Many of us have heard most of the usual tropes about memory: "[Linux uses too
much memory](https://www.linuxatemyram.com/)", "[swap should be double your
physical memory size](https://superuser.com/a/111510/98210)", and the like.
While these are either trivial to dispel, or discussion around them has become
more nuanced in recent years, the myth of "useless" swap is much more grounded
in heuristics and arcana rather than something that can be explained by simple
analogy, and requires somewhat more understanding of memory management to
reason about.

This post is mostly aimed at those who administrate Linux systems and are
interested in hearing the counterpoints to running with undersized/no swap or
running with `vm.swappiness` set to 0.

## Background

It's hard to talk about why having swap and swapping out pages are good things
in normal operation without a shared understanding of some of the basic
underlying mechanisms at play in Linux memory management, so let's make sure
we're on the same page.

### Types of memory

There are many different types of memory in Linux, and each type has its own
properties. Understanding the nuances of these is key to understanding why swap
is important.

For example, there are [*pages* ("blocks" of memory, typically
4k)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_(computer_memory)) responsible for
holding the code for each process being run on your computer. There are also
pages responsible for caching data and metadata related to files accessed by
those programs in order to speed up future access. These are part of the [page
cache](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_cache), and I will refer to them as
*file* memory.

There are also pages which are responsible for the memory allocations made
inside that code, for example, when new memory that has been allocated with
`malloc` is written to, or when using `mmap`'s `MAP_ANONYMOUS` flag. These are
"anonymous" pages -- so called because they are not backed by anything -- and I
will refer to them as *anon* memory.

There are other types of memory too -- shared memory, slab memory, kernel stack
memory, buffers, and the like -- but anonymous memory and file memory are the
most well known and easy to understand ones, so I will use these in my
examples, although they apply equally to these types too.

### Reclaimable/unreclaimable memory

One of the most fundamental questions when thinking about a particular type of
memory is whether it is able to be reclaimed or not. "Reclaim" here means that
the system can, without losing data, purge pages of that type from physical
memory.

For some page types, this is typically fairly trivial. For example, in the case
of *clean* (unmodified) page cache memory, we're simply caching something that
we have on disk for performance, so we can drop the page without having to do
any special operations.

For some page types, this is possible, but not trivial. For example, in the
case of *dirty* (modified) page cache memory, we can't just drop the page,
because the disk doesn't have our modifications yet. As such we either need to
deny reclamation or first get our changes back to disk before we can drop this
memory.

For some page types, this is not possible. For example, in the case of the
anonymous pages mentioned previously, they only exist in memory and in no other
backing store, so they have to be kept there.

## On the nature of swap

If you look for descriptions of the purpose of swap on Linux, you'll inevitably
find many people talking about it as if it is merely an extension of the
physical RAM for use in emergencies. For example, here is a random post I got
as one of the top results from typing "what is swap" in Google:

<!--googleoff: snippet-->

> Swap is essentially emergency memory; a space set aside for times when your
> system temporarily needs more physical memory than you have available in RAM.
> It's considered "bad" in the sense that it's slow and inefficient, and if
> your system constantly needs to use swap then it obviously doesn't have
> enough memory. [...] If you have enough RAM to handle all of your needs, and
> don't expect to ever max it out, then you should be perfectly safe running
> without a swap space.

<!--googleon: snippet-->

To be clear, I don't blame the poster of this comment at all for the content of
their post -- this is accepted as "common knowledge" by a lot of Linux
sysadmins and is probably one of the most likely things that you will hear from
one if you ask them to talk about swap. It is unfortunately also, however, a
misunderstanding of the purpose and use of swap, especially on modern systems.

Above, I talked about reclamation for anonymous pages being "not possible", as
anonymous pages by their nature have no backing store to fall back to when
being purged from memory -- as such, their reclamation would result in complete
data loss for those pages. What if we could create such a store for these
pages, though?

Well, this is precisely what swap is for. Swap is a storage area for these
seemingly "unreclaimable" pages that allows us to page them out to a storage
device on demand. This means that they can now be considered as equally
eligible for reclaim as their more trivially reclaimable friends, like clean
file pages, allowing more efficient use of available physical memory.

**Swap is primarily a mechanism for equality of reclamation, not for emergency
"extra memory". Swap is not what makes your application slow -- entering
overall memory contention is what makes your application slow.**

So in what situations under this "equality of reclamation" scenario would we
legitimately choose to reclaim anonymous pages? Here are, abstractly, some not
uncommon scenarios:

1. During initialisation, a long-running program may allocate and use many
   pages. These pages may also be used as part of shutdown/cleanup, but are not
   needed once the program is "started" (in an application-specific sense).
   This is fairly common for daemons which have significant dependencies to
   initialise.
2. During the program's normal operation, we may allocate memory which is only
   used rarely. It may make more sense for overall system performance to
   require a [major fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_fault#Types) to
   page these in from disk on demand, instead using the memory for
   something else that's more important.

## Examining what happens with/without swap

Let's look at typical situations, and how they perform with and without swap
present. I talk about metrics around "memory contention" in my [talk on cgroup
v2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ikZ8_mRotT4).

### Under no/low memory contention

- **With swap:** We can choose to swap out rarely-used anonymous memory that
  may only be used during a small part of the process lifecycle, allowing us to
  use this memory to improve cache hit rate, or do other optimisations.
- **Without swap:** We cannot swap out rarely-used anonymous memory, as it's
  locked in memory. While this may not immediately present as a problem, on
  some workloads this may represent a non-trivial drop in performance due to
  stale, anonymous pages taking space away from more important use.

### Under moderate/high memory contention

- **With swap:** All memory types have an equal possibility of being reclaimed.
  This means we have more chance of being able to reclaim pages successfully --
  that is, we can reclaim pages that are not quickly faulted back in again
  (thrashing).
- **Without swap:** Anonymous pages are locked into memory as they have nowhere
  to go. The chance of successful long-term page reclamation is lower, as we
  have only some types of memory eligible to be reclaimed at all. The risk of
  page thrashing is higher. The casual reader might think that this would still
  be better as it might avoid having to do disk I/O, but this isn't true -- we
  simply transfer the disk I/O of swapping to dropping hot page caches and
  dropping code segments we need soon.

### Under temporary spikes in memory usage

- **With swap:** We're more resilient to temporary spikes, but in cases of
  severe memory starvation, the period from memory thrashing beginning to the
  OOM killer may be prolonged. We have more visibility into the instigators of
  memory pressure and can act on them more reasonably, and can perform a
  controlled intervention.
- **Without swap:** The OOM killer is triggered more quickly as anonymous pages
  are locked into memory and cannot be reclaimed. We're more likely to thrash
  on memory, but the time between thrashing and OOMing is reduced. Depending on
  your application, this may be better or worse. For example, a queue-based
  application may desire this quick transfer from thrashing to killing. That
  said, this is still too late to be really useful -- the OOM killer is only
  invoked at moments of severe starvation, and relying on this method for such
  behaviour would be better replaced with more opportunistic killing of
  processes as memory contention is reached in the first place.

### Ok, so I want system swap, but how can I tune it for individual applications?

You didn't think you'd get through this entire post without me plugging cgroup
v2, did you? ;-)

Obviously, it's hard for a generic heuristic algorithm to be right all the time,
so it's important for you to be able to give guidance to the kernel.
Historically the only tuning you could do was at the system level, using
`vm.swappiness`. This has two problems: `vm.swappiness` is incredibly hard to
reason about because it only feeds in as a small part of a larger heuristic
system, and it also is system-wide instead of being granular to a smaller set
of processes.

You can also use `mlock` to lock pages into memory, but this requires either
modifying program code, fun with `LD_PRELOAD`, or doing horrible things with a
debugger at runtime. In VM-based languages this also doesn't work very well,
since you generally have no control over allocation and end up having to
`mlockall`, which has no precision towards the pages you actually care about.

cgroup v2 has a tunable per-cgroup in the form of `memory.low`, which allows us
to tell the kernel to prefer other applications for reclaim below a certain
threshold of memory used. This allows us to not prevent the kernel from
swapping out parts of our application, but prefer to reclaim from other
applications under memory contention. Under normal conditions, the kernel's
swap logic is generally pretty good, and allowing it to swap out pages
opportunistically generally increases system performance. Swap thrash under
heavy memory contention is not ideal, but it's more a property of simply
running out of memory entirely than a problem with the swapper. In these
situations, you typically want to fail fast by self-killing non-critical
processes when memory pressure starts to build up.

You can not simply rely on the OOM killer for this. The OOM killer is only
invoked in situations of dire failure when we've *already* entered a state
where the system is severely unhealthy and may well have been so for a while.
You need to opportunistically handle the situation yourself before ever
thinking about the OOM killer.

Determination of memory pressure is somewhat difficult using traditional Linux
memory counters, though. We have some things which seem somewhat related, but
are merely tangential -- memory usage, page scans, etc -- and from these
metrics alone it's very hard to tell an efficient memory configuration from one
that's trending towards memory contention. There is a group of us at Facebook,
spearheaded by
[Johannes](https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/LKML/list/?submitter=45),
working on developing new metrics that expose memory pressure more easily that
should help with this in future. If you're interested in hearing more about
this, [I go into detail about one metric being considered in my talk on cgroup
v2](https://youtu.be/ikZ8_mRotT4?t=2145).

## Tuning

### How much swap do I need, then?

In general, the minimum amount of swap space required for optimal memory
management depends on the number of anonymous pages pinned into memory that are
rarely reaccessed by an application, and the value of reclaiming those
anonymous pages. The latter is mostly a question of which pages are no longer
purged to make way for these infrequently accessed anonymous pages.

If you have a bunch of disk space and a recent (4.0+) kernel, more swap is
almost always better than less. In older kernels `kswapd`, one of the kernel
processes responsible for managing swap, was historically very overeager to
swap out memory aggressively the more swap you had. In recent times, swapping
behaviour when a large amount of swap space is available has been significantly
improved. If you're running kernel 4.0+, having a larger swap on a modern
kernel should not result in overzealous swapping. As such, if you have the
space, having a swap size of a few GB keeps your options open on modern
kernels.

If you're more constrained with disk space, then the answer really depends on
the tradeoffs you have to make, and the nature of the environment. Ideally you
should have enough swap to make your system operate optimally at normal and
peak (memory) load. What I'd recommend is setting up a few testing systems with
2-3GB of swap or more, and monitoring what happens over the course of a week or
so under varying (memory) load conditions. As long as you haven't encountered
severe memory starvation during that week -- in which case the test will not
have been very useful -- you will probably end up with some number of MB of
swap occupied. As such, it's probably worth having at least that much swap
available, in addition to a little buffer for changing workloads. `atop` in
logging mode can also show you which applications are having their pages
swapped out in the `SWAPSZ` column, so if you don't already use it on your
servers to log historic server state you probably want to set it up on these
test machines with logging mode as part of this experiment. This also tells you
*when* your application started swapping out pages, which you can tie to log
events or other key data.

Another thing worth considering is the nature of the swap medium. Swap reads
tend to be highly random, since we can't reliably predict which pages will be
refaulted and when. On an SSD this doesn't matter much, but on spinning disks,
random I/O is extremely expensive since it requires physical movement to
achieve. On the other hand, refaulting of file pages is likely less random,
since files related to the operation of a single application at runtime tend to
be less fragmented. This might mean that on a spinning disk you may  want to
bias more towards reclaiming file pages instead of swapping out anonymous
pages, but again, you need to test and evaluate how this balances out for your
workload.

For laptop/desktop users who want to hibernate to swap, this also needs to be
taken into account -- in this case your swap file should be at least your
physical RAM size.

### What should my swappiness setting be?

First, it's important to understand what `vm.swappiness` does. `vm.swappiness`
is a sysctl that biases memory reclaim either towards reclamation of anonymous
pages, or towards file pages. It does this using two different attributes:
`file_prio` (our willingness to reclaim file pages) and `anon_prio` (our
willingness to reclaim anonymous pages). `vm.swappiness` plays into this, as it
becomes the default value for `anon_prio`, and it also is subtracted from the
default value of 200 for `file_prio`, which means for a value of
`vm.swappiness = 50`, the outcome is that `anon_prio` is 50, and `file_prio` is
150 (the exact numbers don't matter as much as their relative weight compared
to the other).

This means that, in general, **vm.swappiness is simply a ratio of how costly
reclaiming and refaulting anonymous memory is compared to file memory for your
hardware and workload**. The lower the value, the more you tell the kernel that
infrequently accessed anonymous pages are expensive to swap out and in on your
hardware. The higher the value, the more you tell the kernel that the cost of
swapping anonymous pages and file pages is similar on your hardware. The memory
management subsystem will still try to mostly decide whether it swaps file or
anonymous pages based on how hot the memory is, but swappiness tips the cost
calculation either more towards swapping or more towards dropping filesystem
caches when it could go either way. On SSDs these are basically as expensive as
each other, so setting `vm.swappiness = 100` (full equality) may work well. On
spinning disks, swapping may be significantly more expensive since swapping in
generally requires random reads, so you may want to bias more towards a lower
value.

The reality is that most people don't really have a feeling about which their
hardware demands, so it's non-trivial to tune this value based on instinct
alone -- this is something that you need to test using different values. You
can also spend time evaluating the memory composition of your system and core
applications and their behaviour under mild memory reclamation.

When talking about `vm.swappiness`, an extremely important change to consider
from recent(ish) times is [this change to vmscan by Satoru Moriya in
2012](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/stable/linux-stable.git/patch/?id=fe35004fbf9eaf67482b074a2e032abb9c89b1dd),
which changes the way that `vm.swappiness = 0` is handled quite significantly.

Essentially, the patch makes it so that we are extremely biased against
scanning (and thus reclaiming) any anonymous pages at all with
`vm.swappiness = 0`, unless we are already encountering severe memory
contention. As mentioned previously in this post, that's generally not what you
want, since this prevents equality of reclamation prior to extreme memory
pressure occurring, which may actually *lead* to this extreme memory pressure
in the first place. `vm.swappiness = 1` is the lowest you can go without
invoking the special casing for anonymous page scanning implemented in that
patch.

The kernel default here is `vm.swappiness = 60`. This value is generally not
too bad for most workloads, but it's hard to have a general default that suits
all workloads. As such, a valuable extension to the tuning mentioned in the
"how much swap do I need" section above would be to test these systems with
differing values for vm.swappiness, and monitor your application and system
metrics under heavy (memory) load. Some time in the near future, once we have a
decent implementation of [refault
detection](https://youtu.be/ikZ8_mRotT4?t=2145) in the kernel, you'll also be
able to determine this somewhat workload-agnostically by looking at cgroup v2's
page refaulting metrics.

### Update as of 2019-07: memory pressure metrics in kernel 4.20+

The refault metrics mentioned as in development earlier are now in the kernel
from 4.20 onwards and can be enabled with `CONFIG_PSI=y`. See my talk at SREcon
at around the 25:05 mark:

{% youtube beefUhRH5lU %}

## In conclusion

- Swap is a useful tool to allow equality of reclamation of memory pages, but
  its purpose is frequently misunderstood, leading to its negative perception
  across the industry. If you use swap in the spirit intended, though -- as a
  method of increasing equality of reclamation -- you'll find that it's a
  useful tool instead of a hindrance.
- Disabling swap does not prevent disk I/O from becoming a problem under memory
  contention, it simply shifts the disk I/O thrashing from anonymous pages to
  file pages. Not only may this be less efficient, as we have a smaller pool of
  pages to select from for reclaim, but it may also contribute to getting into
  this high contention state in the first place.
- Swap can make a system slower to OOM kill, since it provides another, slower
  source of memory to thrash on in out of memory situations -- the OOM killer
  is only used by the kernel as a last resort, after things have already become
  monumentally screwed. The solutions here depend on your system:
    - You can opportunistically change the system workload depending on
      cgroup-local or global memory pressure. This prevents getting into these
      situations in the first place, but solid memory pressure metrics are
      lacking throughout the history of Unix. Hopefully this should be better
      soon with the addition of [refault
      detection](https://youtu.be/ikZ8_mRotT4?t=2145).
    - You can bias reclaiming (and thus swapping) away from certain processes
      per-cgroup using `memory.low`, allowing you to protect critical daemons
      without disabling swap entirely.

---

Many thanks to [Rahul](https://github.com/rahulg),
[Tejun](https://github.com/htejun), and
[Johannes](https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/LKML/list/?submitter=45) for
their extensive suggestions and feedback on this post.
